Interview №11
man
67 years old
Place of interview: telegram
Date of interview: 13.09.23
Born and raised in the soviet union, worked in Military intelligence agency, and after in Security Service of Ukraine.
Interview time: ~120 mins
Short clippings from interview (translation from rus)
The success of any propaganda is based on two things. First, it is not literacy of political and any other illiteracy of the population. Stupidity, I would even say, the population's inability to carry out elementary analyses of what is blown into their ears. And the second thing is the lack of alternatives, competition, other sources of information, that is the basis of any propaganda. By the way, it is very well seen in Ukraine now. That is, the bulk of the population doesn't bother to get information from other sources. If people could compare what is presented from the Ukrainian media and compare it at least with deutsche welle, cnn, bbc, not to mention the political blogs of the opposing side. Then people comparing it, they would have questions, why they say so here and so there. But this does not happen for the majority of the population. As a result, when people have a certain set of means as a source of information and do not think to compare it with other sources, there is a distortion in their brains. Propaganda is a set of technical means and thoughts that are clothed in the impact on the minds of others, thoughts of a very small group that determines the policy of a country. This set of tools is propaganda.
Soviet propaganda by and large did not differ from the propaganda of the West, in the West any dissent was suppressed, no matter what they say about democracy. In all times of suppression dissent was the main tool of propaganda. In the Soviet Union propaganda was not in such a harsh form as for example in Nazi Germany or McCarthyism in the United States, where any dissent was suppressed. But they called themselves awesome democrats. In the Soviet Union it was carried out more gently, and I say this from the point of view of the impact on the population - because the impact was from a small age, maybe in kindergarten not so strongly, but here you enter junior school, and in the first grade you are accepted into the October League, and there is the exaltation of Lenin, the Communist Party and so on and so forth. And it is supplied with various examples, about the first pioneers there, how there was such a Pavlik Morozov, who in the 20s of the last century, his father was a kulak (Forced collectivisation of agriculture led to repression of peasants, especially among their wealthy stratum - kulaks), hid grain from Prodrazverstka (the policy of ensuring food procurement at the expense of taxing peasants), and he gave up his father, along with this grain, then his father hacked him to death with a sabre, martyrdom. And because of that, he was made an idol, the first pioneer, and it was drummed into the heads of the kids - look what a hero Pavlik is, and there were plenty of such examples, but he was the brightest. Then you join the pioneers, you take the pioneer oath - it's all elements of propaganda. And in the absence of alternatives, a person grows up in the conditions of ideological processing. Then, the Komsomol, Komsomol meetings, put excellent students as an example, to the wall of shame bad students. That is, from childhood to adulthood, but in the Soviet Union the restrictions were great, not like now, you study at university, you pay money and get grades. In the Soviet Union there were not so many institutes that would give higher education. And there was a demand for certain professions, so if you studied at school with a "C", you were not allowed to go to university. It was almost impossible to get into university. There were some privileged people. For example, a person who served in the army was admitted to the institute out of competition, this is also propaganda. When I entered the military school, there were 8 people per place. In a regular university, even more. It was impossible to get in if you were a third grader. There were also colleges for the dumb ones, after the eighth grade. And all this, all this was also an element of propaganda and competition. So you either go as a janitor or you go to university. You don't want to be an engineer, so you go to be a janitor. The guiding finger of all this stuff was the Communist Party. Because you were an October student, then you became a pioneer, you were trained, you were accepted into the Komsomol, the Komsomol is the younger son of the Party, and that's it, from there you have one road, if you reached this stage - to enter the Party. Well, for example, an officer in the Red Army, without the Party could not be. A manager, a workshop manager, you couldn't be a Party man without being a Party man. From the middle to the top, everyone had to join the Party. This is also an element of propaganda, because there was propaganda in the Party, despite the fact that a Party member should be morally and politically savvy, but nevertheless there was constant work with him, nobody left a Party member without attention. He was constantly going to advanced courses, political courses, all sorts of seminars were held. There was such an instrument as the University of Marxism-Leninism. It permeated all party systems through and through. If an ordinary party member had to go to political meetings 2 times a week, the one who entered this university of Marxism-Leninism, there were 3 faculties, political, legal, historical. And I graduated from all three in my time. You go there for two years. But you don't have to take party political classes. You're a student, even though you have good titles, you're a student. And twice a week, I remember when I was stationed in Germany. And there were lecturers there, we went to the central house of officers, there to the lecture hall. But we always did it this way. The class was two hours, in an hour the lecturer gave us a quick lecture, all grown-up people, all under 30 years old. Everyone understood perfectly well that it's bullshit, that everyone is sick of it. And then with a joyful exclamation: "Comrade officers, a beer?", went to the bar and there continued the lesson. And it was like that all over the place, it's also a propaganda system. Although all this system, as you can see, under certain conditions, when the controllability of the country and the party was broken, eventually led to the collapse of the Soviet Union. Any propaganda is only good if certain measures of violence are applied. But they are different, either as draconian as they were in Nazi Germany and the United States, and a little milder in the Soviet Union. There was a separate structure in the army, the Party Political Department of the Soviet army, and it was also responsible for all this propaganda and so on. The media played a big role, television, newspapers. You didn't have your gadgets then, the main thing was television, but the most important thing was newspapers, the Tas message and everything else. And everybody by and large read those newspapers. There were commitments. Communists and Komsomol members (those who worked and got a speciality) were obliged to read the newspaper Pravda, the magazine Kommunist. And people read it all with great interest. On every corner there were such glass stands, and numbers of newspapers were displayed there. And if something interesting happened in the Soviet Union or in the world, and there was a report like that, a lot of people would gather around these stands and try to read these reports. And there were a lot of things like that. And to cover all of them, it would probably take a phd. But I've covered the basics. The thing that affected me the most as a person was the mindless stupid lying propaganda that started when Gorbachev came to power. They started to undo what had been done under Brezhnev. They started their stupid perestroika. And they started to worsen people's lives, huge queues started, literally, for everything. And it was all purposeful. As a result, the Soviet Union collapsed, squabbles started, and so on. I'll give you an example of the stupidity of the political bureaucrats, which was imposed by Gorbachev. 1987, winter, I was on rearmament, we were at the stage of combat alignment, I was the commander of a separate anti-aircraft-missile division. It's minus 35 outside, it's night. There is a preparation for night fighting. And then comes running ordinaries, says, Comrade Major, here is a secret telegram, you are urgently summoned to the brigade headquarters. The brigade headquarters is 120 kilometres away. And not only me, but other division commanders as well, we jumped into vans, because it was urgent, we thought the war had started there. When we arrived, we were all in the snow, our faces red from the frost, wearing earflaps and turtlenecks. The chief of the political department is sitting there, wearing trousers, drinking tea. Since I was the chief of the first division, I reported that here is the chief lieutenant colonel, the commanders of the units on your orders arrived. Do you know what question he asked us? I remember this stupid question for the rest of my life. "Comrade officers, why don't you fulfil the directives of the Party and the political department of the brigade?" Our eyes went wide, we don't know what he's talking about. I explain. "Where are your plans for reorganisation for three months?" To ask us this idiotic question, we had to travel 120 kilometres. And this is also propaganda from this particular person, but in this situation it worked as anti-propaganda. The guys held me back so that I didn't fix his face. But they limited themselves to foul language, even though he is the head of the political department. We got in the car and drove away. Because I've got 1,500 people freezing in the tundra, and this arsehole is asking stupid questions. I joined the Party a total of four times. Each time, something happened that closed my way into the party. The first time I joined was when I was a sophomore in high school. I was deputy secretary of the Komsomol organisation, I was an activist. But I was a hooligan at the same time. Often went AWOL to my sweetheart. And when I came back very late, I covered myself with everything I could and fell asleep so they wouldn't notice. In the morning I woke up to the key turning. And the key was only for me, one more man and the petty officer. So the petty officer comes in and starts stealing soap and handkerchiefs. And then we got into a fight with him, with the head of the course. I don't remember what it was about. I told him what I knew about his thefts. He pulls out my personal file, and I had to pass the party commission to join the party, you go through a whole series of steps. So he pulls out my file and says that as long as he's the head of the course, I'll never get into the party. I tear the file in half, shoot him, hit him in the eye. And screaming that I don't want to be in the same party with such a shit, I run out. It was a scandal for the whole school. I'll tell you a secret, it was the only case in the entire Soviet Union, I reached the division commander, not being in the party, without party. I'll tell you honestly, I remember when Brezhnev died, I remember that state, people were scared. A lot of people thought there was going to be a war with the United States. The effectiveness of propaganda is so relative, and it depends on what target audience this propaganda is aimed at. What age group it's aimed at. But propaganda was effective up to time, here came an engineer to work, and the illusion of propaganda was shattered by reality, where everyone steals, corruption, from small to great. Of course, there is no comparison with corruption in the USA, where it is called lobbyism, and Ukraine. But all narratives were shattered by the harsh reality. And then who continued to live in illusion, unable to get rid of the influence of propaganda, and who just lived, because what can you do. People mostly loved their country, were proud of the victory over fascism, the flight of the first Gagarin, and so on and so forth. 85 per cent of people on earth don't analyse information and just do what they say. 12 per cent are performers, but they don't create this propaganda. And the 3 per cent who make the propaganda. Propaganda is all over social media. Up to the point where bloggers come out who don't understand shit but want to make money and start talking rubbish. Of course there are similarities between modern bloggers and propagandists in the USSR. It's just that modern bloggers, as I said, dump information for money on young, unsteady minds. It's just that the medium of delivery of information has changed. Back then it was newspapers, back then it was political information to pioneers. Komsomol members read political information to the pioneers. Party workers read political information to their colleagues and their younger party members. And now, with the Internet, you can do whatever you want. But the essence hasn't changed. Someone used to prepare information and then spread it through newspapers and propagandists, there was such a position. It's the same now. Bloggers who just read out the information. But there are others, initiators who believe in it and promote narratives. As an example of the influence of propaganda, there was an uncle called Mavrodi, and he created the firm mmm, in fact, he created a pyramid scheme. And like any pyramid, when it reaches certain limits, it collapses, leaving thousands, tens of thousands of people without money. And there are a lot of such examples in the news, such and such a firm defrauded its depositors. And the question is what influenced people. Propaganda? No. Greed. They were told, if you invest 1 ruble, you get 100. And how many years have passed, how many examples, and people still fall for it. And it seems that the state is propagandising on TV that you should not fall for it. But it doesn't work, because greed. A media designer is actually a political designer. Propaganda in different historical periods is very different. Stalin's cult of personality is also propaganda. But propaganda during Stalin's period and during Brezhnev's thaw are two completely different levels and directions of propaganda. There was a different contigent, the basis of the population in the 30s-40s was the peasantry and working class.
Note - Lenin also played on the greed of the population, as they were the main population - the main slogans - land for peasants, factories for workers. - and that's exactly what the pyramid schemes are doing now.
served in the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany.
